(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.) ACT II.
SCENE I.
Summer pavilion in the palace of the
Marquise de Rotondo.
Dancing going on in different parts of the
stage.
Baritana seated and a group of cavaliers are
standing round her.
Don José standing opposite to her with his
eyes fixed on her, left.
The Marquise and Marchioness paying
attention to their various guests.
Lords and ladies promenading.
Music which dies away as they dance up.
First cavalier to Marquise.
Upon my honour, Marquise, I never saw the
Marchioness looking so well.
And so youthful.
Really, gentlemen, your compliments
overpower me.
Marquise aside.
How you dervish they all are.
Aloud.
You must really come and dine with me
to-morrow.
I want your opinion of some wine of
a rare quality.
And you show so much taste in other
matters that I should value your opinion
very much.
Women and wine, you know.
A judge of the one is generally a
judge of the other.
Don José still gazing on Maritana.
Thoughtful and musing.
Ah, that's well.
Marquise going up to him.
Well, my lord, do admire the fate.
The women are lovely, are they not?
By the by, speaking of lovely women, have
you seen my Marchioness?
Your lordship's eyes seem fixed on my niece.
Yes, how well she sustains her new dignity.
I really think that you and I have
only rectified a little error of destiny in
placing her in the position which is
evidently the one for which nature intended
her.
What is your opinion?
My opinion is that your lordship's opinion
is my opinion, and that you are perfectly
right.
Ah, Marquis, you are quite a courtier.
Your tact is unrivalled.
How go on His Majesty's birds, of which
you are the governor?
I am proud to say that since I
have been at the head of the establishment,
the royal birds have reached an
unprecedented plumpness.
By the by, Don Carlo is seriously ill,
and if his appointment should become vacant,
pray remind me of it.
Oh, this is too much.
Don Carlo, grandmaster of the royal lap
-dogs?
Oh, could I ever aspire to such a
dignity, chief of the precious pets?
Can I be worthy of such a position?
Your peculiar talents design you for the
situation.
Pointing to Marchioness.
But, my dear Marquis, do you see those
two young tall gallants paying attention to
that lovely wife of yours?
Upon my honour, I think she grows younger
every day.
He turns away and approaches Maritana.
He too is struck with the beauty of
my wife.
Poor young creature, she little knows the
havoc she is making with her charms.
Don José to Maritana.
You seem thoughtful.
Are you not pleased with the fate?
There is all that wealth and taste could
bring together.
Nothing is wanting.
Maritana, partly aside.
Nothing is wanting, but one whose absence
leaves a void within my heart makes me
loathe the splendour which surrounds me.
A servant comes down and speaks aside to
Don José.
The person whom your lordship expected has
arrived.
Goes up.
Tis well.
Aside to Marquis.
Get rid of these people at once.
Marquis aside.
At once?
That's rather unceremonious.
But it must be done.
Allowed.
Gentlemen, pray lead your partners to the
adjoining room.
There is something provided there which, I
flatter myself, will gratify and astonish
you.
Aside.
Sandwiches and wine?
Music.
All the guests go off left centre.
It was necessary to get rid of them,
as Don José desired it.
That wine must do it.
The Marquis and Marchioness are about to
follow guests, when Don José stops them.
The lovely countess had better remain here.
Will you also oblige me by doing so,
my good host?
Certainly.
It is we that are obliged.
I am particularly obliged.
Don José aside to Maritana.
This fate shall be complete, even to his
presence, whose absence leaves a void and
makes this splendour nothing.
Exit Lady Marchioness left centre.
Maritana to Marquis.
Did you hear his lordship's last words?
You are the host.
Tis you that invite the guests.
Will it be as Don José has promised?
I dare say it will.
Aside.
I did not hear what Don José said,
but I think it was my duty nevertheless
to echo it.
What does this all mean?
Why this mystery?
This marriage which I was told was the
wish of the Queen, my gracious benefactress?
If I ask to see the Queen, I
am told to wait.
If I enquire where is the husband to
whom I was so mysteriously united, whether
he is an exile, whether he is alive,
when he will return, I am told to
wait.
Always the same reply.
Tell me, Marquis, am I deceived?
Has Don José been deceiving me?
I hope not, for if he has deceived
you, he is capable of deceiving me, and
my hopes with regard to the royal lapdogs
would be blighted for ever.
But have you never seen your husband since
you married him?
I did not see him then.
Your love must have been particularly blind.
Not so.
It was his generosity that I admired.
Enter Don José's centre.
That inspired in me the strongest interest
towards him.
For my sake he has suffered much, perhaps
suffers now.
I will demand of Don José when shall
I see the Queen, when shall I see
my husband?
Don José coming down centre.
I am glad.
I am just in time to answer the
question.
Lady, you shall see your husband to-day.
To-day?
Marquis, aside to Don José.
Isn't he dead then, after all?
Silence.
Surely, Count, I must have misunderstood
you.
Be calm, and listen to what I am
about to say.
Now I shall hear something.
Now then.
He is approaching to listen when Don José
makes a sign to him to retire.
He does so with an air of disappointment,
bowed up centre by Don José.
You wished us to be alone.
Now let me hear of my husband.
Don José right.
He is at hand.
The King enters centre from right.
He is compelled to keep himself concealed,
being in hourly danger from the law, for
your sake, and for your sake alone he
has ventured here.
Crosses up left.
Oh, we will find him a place of
refuge.
Where is he?
Here.
The King advances, puts his cloak off on
chair, right centre.
Maritana recoils with an exclamation.
King right.
Lady Maritana, do you not recollect me?
Maritana aside.
He?
To Don José.
That is not my husband.
He to whom I gave my hand was—
Don José left aside.
Don César de Besen, behold him there.
No, no, I never felt an interest but
for one, and he, you told me, was
Don César.
I did but deceive you for your good.
Gets up centre.
Oh, wretched Maritana.
Do you not remember, in a public place,
one whose eyes followed you wherever you
moved?
One who of all the multitude around was
alone charmed by the melancholy of your
songs?
I remember you, señor.
Aside.
For I trembled whilst I sought his bounty.
It was because I loved you, it was
because my happiness was centred all in you,
that I determined to raise you to the
station which you coveted.
I resolved that you should share my love
and— Don José centre interrupting.
But being then prescribed, Don César could
offer you nothing but his name.
But now we meet again, under happier
influences.
Give me but one word, one look, to
bid me hope for your love, and you
shall be my sovereign mistress.
I will live for you, yes, for you
alone.
Passionately.
Don César, remember someone may overhear.
Lovely Maritana, our return must be unknown,
but my danger need not separate me from
you.
We can be happy separated from the world.
Let us hence together.
Together?
A few miles from Madrid, there is a
retreat where love may revel in security.
Thither let us fly.
Don José looking off right.
You must not delay.
The guests will soon grow weary of the
dance.
My Maritana, come.
Why this ungenerous hesitation?
Maritana aside.
Oh, heaven!
Allowed.
But to leave thus suddenly, without even
saying farewell to the Marquis.
Don José aside.
The guests are returning.
Allowed.
Don César, the Countess is right.
It might awaken suspicion.
If she were to quit the fate thus
suddenly, she will follow you.
A carriage will be waiting at the door
of yonder garden.
Remember your lover.
Don José looks at him.
Your husband waits for you.
Someone comes.
Quick, quick, be gone.
Takes King's cloak from chair and puts it
on him.
Ladies and gentlemen cross from left to
right.
Oh, I am justly punished.
Oh, I hate these golds purchased, as they
must be by days of misery.
Music.
The King exits rapidly centre and off right.
The Marchioness enters, and at a signal from
Don José, leads out Maritana, who is in
tears, left centre.
How every obstacle that stood between me and
my desire melts into the air.
Don César enters in the disguise of a
monk, centre left.
Don César approaching Don José with great
humility.
Arms for our monastery's son.
Don José crosses to left.
So, Don José, here I am once more.
Throwing off disguise and discovering
himself.
You, Don César, not dead.
Not yet.
Who saved your life?
You did, by rescuing me from the gallows.
But I saw you led out to execution.
I heard the muskets.
So did I.
Aside.
And here are the bullets extracted in good
time from the guns by my faithful Lazarelle
Lowe.
Shorts bag containing bullets.
Yes, here they are.
Six in number.
They're better in my pocket than in my
body.
I never expected to receive them with so
much satisfaction.
Crosses left.
But you fell.
Of course I did.
I could not do less when six gallant
soldiers took the trouble to make me their
target.
I should have wounded their pride if I
had made them think they had missed their
aim.
I have been deceived.
And so have I.
The illusion was so perfect that I really
thought I was dead.
And consequently, all my creditors paid.
Till I found myself among some of my
old companions with a dice box in my
hand and a flagon before me.
Crosses right.
Who can have betrayed me?
Don César aside.
Thank heavens he does not suspect the dear
boy.
Sitting down unceremoniously, aloud.
There seems to be a fate here.
There is.
You are in danger.
Why did you come?
I'll tell you if you'll have a little
patience.
I happen to see a carriage with my
own arms upon it.
And on enquiry, I found it belonged to
the Countess de Bazin.
So here I am.
Where's my wife?
For you know I've not much time to
lose if the sentence of that cursed edict
is to be respected.
Don José aside.
He is not aware of his pardon.
Allowed with dignity.
Tell me, Don César, what are your plans?
To see my wife.
She's mine.
And I may as well take possession.
You gave her to me and I have
come to you, therefore, to profit by your
benevolence.
Don José aside.
Must all my designs be thus o'erthrown?
No, it shall not be.
Into Marquis' Centre from left.
My guests are merry fellows.
They do nothing but drink to the Countess
de Bazin.
Don César right.
The deuce they do.
The Countess de Bazin, my wife.
Where is she?
I beg pardon.
Are you Don César?
Are you the gentleman that is not dead?
Don José left.
Aside to Marquis.
Not a word.
Not another word.
Evince no astonishment at anything you hear
or see.
Do as I wish.
Crosses left.
And the left dogs?
Shall be yours.
Crosses to Don César.
Allowed.
Don César, your rights are sacred and they
shall be respected.
Your wife, the Countess de Bazin, is here
and shall join you immediately.
Wait for her.
Exit centre and off right.
She comes and I shall see her as
I have seen her in my dreams, radiant
in youth and beauty.
The Marquis is going.
Stay near me, sir, and support me.
I am sure I shall require it.
The rapture will be too much for me.
The soft white hand haunts me like a
spectre.
Enter Don José, leading and Marchioness.
Centre from left.
Marquis to Don César.
Don't agitate yourself.
Be calm.
I know what it is to await the
coming of a lovely woman.
I have a Marchioness.
Don José looking significantly at the
Marquis.
Don César, behold the Countess de Bazin.
Presents Marchioness.
The Countess?
The devil.
Marquis aside.
He's giving him my wife.
The Marchioness smiles.
She likes it.
Don César bows formally.
Aside.
No wonder she wore a veil—sixty by the
mass.
He struck with her.
Don César to Marquis.
Will you—will you show me the nearest way
to the door?
Don César, the Countess de Bazin is prepared
to fulfil all the duties of a wife
to him, who has a right to demand
them.
I trust you will make no sacrifice on
my account.
Marchioness turns away.
To Don José.
You can make out another warrant for my
execution.
I should prefer it to this.
To Marquis.
My good friend, did you ever see such
a perfect gorgon?
Frightful, isn't she?
Marquis aside.
Frightful, Don César.
The man's troubles have ruined his eyesight.
The Countess awaits your bidding.
She's prepared to share your state and
fortunes.
Madam, I will not take advantage of the
accident of fate.
Charmed as I must be at the generosity
of the her who would share the lot
of so poor, so dunned, so desperate a
libertine as myself.
She knew your position when she consented to
the union.
Did she?
Then I will not be outdone in generosity.
Crosses aside.
Madam, I will not take you from those
to whom you are endeared by years.
Long years of tender association.
At your age, I mean, that is.
In fact, madam, I free you from every
tie.
I am no longer a husband.
Did you ever see such infernal wrinkles?
Aside.
Perhaps, madam, at some distant period, some
very distant period.
She turns to him.
No, I can never venture.
The two Marquis.
As a reasonable man, Marquis, I ask you,
if on any consideration in the world you
would call that venerable woman wife.
Aside.
This is too bad.
Allowed.
If you don't like her yourself, you needn't
make other people dissatisfied.
Other people?
Is there any fool?
Pray, let me not stand in anybody's way.
Don José, who has conversed apart with the
Marchioness.
Come, let us end this business.
Crosses left.
You know, Don Cesar, that the object of
this marriage was your title and not
yourself.
I am willing to stand by that bargain.
At your nuptials, you had scarcely ten
minutes to live.
Ah, I was happier then than I am
now.
The Countess does not love you.
What wonderful unanimity in man and wife.
Your chains may yet be golden ones.
Your wife is rich.
You have nothing.
Your estimate of my property is singularly
exact.
You shall have a pension of six thousand
piastres if you quit Madrid forever.
Quit Madrid?
The city of my birth, the home of
my creditors.
The last apostrophe has decided me.
I'll go.
You must also renounce all right acquired by
your marriage.
Forgo the bliss of— Peeps at the
Marchioness.
It's a bargain.
Will you sign a paper to that effect?
Don Cesar hurries to table right.
Will I?
Dictate the terms.
The more binding the better.
Don José dictating.
Don Cesar, Count de Garofa, engages on the
honour of a gentleman to quit Madrid
forever.
Don Cesar pauses.
Forever?
My poor creditors.
And renounces the Countess de Bazin, his
wife.
Six thousand piastres for that?
I would have purchased the same advantages
at double the amount.
Right, sir.
My wife.
Never to claim the name of husband.
Oh, never, never.
Sign.
Don C— A servant enters at back and
calls left centre.
The carriage of the Countess de Bazin.
Don Cesar pauses.
May?
Sign, sign, Don Cesar.
Goes up to him.
Make way for the Countess de Bazin.
Maritana passes it back from left to right,
attended it by nobles.
I have been deceived.
What do I see?
Maritana exits right centre.
Don Cesar is about to follow when Don
José interposes.
Stay your signature.
You have pledged the honour of a gentleman.
Don Cesar tears the paper.
I see the trick.
There.
Don Cesar, remember you are a condemned
criminal.
A word from me would be the signal
of your death.
At last you throw off the mask.
Now we understand each other.
Flight is still possible.
I will aid you on one condition.
No, no more shameful bargains.
Be warned.
Pursue your wife a single step and it
will lead to your destruction.
She is then my wife?
Give me free passage or I shall owe
the law another life.
Away.
Pushes him aside and rushes off.
Oh, guards.
Drum.
Soldiers enter from left.
Pursue that man.
If he resists, fire upon him immediately.
Music.
General movement.
Tableau.
End of Act Two.